---
layout: post
title: Tern
tags:
- javascript
- tern
---

I spend a rather large fraction of my days inside Emacs, writing and
editing JavaScript code. Of this time, a significant amount is spent
doing things that follow patterns. Pattern which, with a little
machine intelligence, could easily be automated.

Years ago, before accidentally rolling into this JavaScript career, I
mostly programmed Common Lisp. Emacs [integration][slime] for Common
Lisp is divine. It does just about *everything*, from interactively
exploring and modifying a running system, to debugging, to looking up
documentation for you on the web. But the main two things that made
day-to-day programming in that environment so wonderful were that it
automatically showed me a list of argument names when I was typing
arguments to a function call, and that it allowed me to jump to the
definition of something at a single keystroke (and then jump back to
where I came from at another keystroke). This meant that I hardly ever
had to break my flow to go look up the interface for a function, or
wonder how or where something is implemented.

[slime]: http://common-lisp.net/project/slime/

One thing about machine intelligence is that machines don't develop it
spontaneously. Someone has to put in the time to teach them. Since
programming-language geekery is my thing, and having even half-decent
JavaScript integration for my editor would save me a lot of time, I've
started exploring this problem.

Early this year I got a prototype off the ground that did a passable
job at the basic features that I wanted (argument hints,
jump-to-definition, and of course decent auto-completion). Using that
prototype, I duped the [crowd][indie] into kindly spotting me some
money to continue working on it. The result is called [Tern][tern]
([github][gh]), which is now an editor-independent static analysis
engine that is being integrated into several different editors.

[indie]: http://indiegogo.com/projects/tern-intelligent-javascript-editing
[tern]: http:/ternjs.net
[gh]: https://github.com/marijnh/tern

In this post, I'll try to document how Tern works.

## General approach

As a first step, Tern parses your code using [Acorn][ac]. If it's not
currently syntactically valid because you are in the middle of editing
it, it still parses it, using the [error-tolerant parser][acloose] in
Acorn.

[ac]: acorn.html
[acloose]: parse-dammit.html

It then, in a first pass, builds up a representation of the scopes in
the program. If we ignore `with` and some of the nasty behavior of
`eval` (which Tern does), scopes in JavaScript are entirely static and
trivial to determine. This already gives us enough information to
auto-complete variable names, and jump to the definition of variables.

But we also want to complete property names, show argument hints, and
jump to the definition of functions and types that are, for example,
stored in a property.

For this, we need to figure out the types of the program's elements.
This is the central problem that Tern tries to solve. In a language
like JavaScript, it is a rather challenging problem.

## Type inference algorithm

The type inference in Tern is done by a second pass (after the one
that builds up the scopes) over the code. You can picture this pass as
building up a graph that represents the way types flow through the
program.

Each variable and object property, as well as some kinds of
expressions, will have an *abstract value* associated with them. This is
a set of types that have been observed for this element. These are the
nodes in the graph. The edges consist of forwarding information. For
example, if the expression `y = x` is found in the problem, the
abstract value for variable `x` will be set to propagate all types it
receives to the abstract value of `y`. Thus, if `x` is somehow known
to be a string, `y` will also get type string (but might, depending on
how it is used, receive more types than just that).

The graph may be initialized from one or more [definition files][defs],
which are a simple JSON data format that contain information about
global variables and their types. Such files for the basic JavaScript
environment and the interface exposed by browsers are included in the
Tern distribution. These tell Tern that, for example, the `parseFloat`
global holds a function type of one string argument that returns a
number.

[defs]: https://github.com/marijnh/tern/tree/master/defs

Let's see what the graph would look like for this pointless program.

```javascript
var x = Math.E;
var y = x;
var z;
x = "hello";
```

<img src="res/tern_simple_graph.png" alt="A trivial type graph" style="margin: 1em 0">

You see blue circles that represent the abstract values for our three
variables and for the `Math.E` property. The orange boxes are actual
types. The basic ECMAScript definition file has given `Math.E` the
type number. Since it is then assigned to `x`, an edge is added from
`Math.E` to `x`, which causes `x` to also get the number type. `y` is
initialized to `x` so it gets all of `x`'s types. When `x` is assigned
a string value, the string type flows into it and, consequently, also
into `y`. The variables now have both the string and number type
associated with them.

Variable `z` is never written to or read, so it just sits there sadly
in its corner, without any connection to the rest of the program, and
its abstract value remains empty.

Propagation of types is not always direct. In many cases, the
algorithm will assign a specific propagation strategy, which may
contain arbitrary code, to handle types that appear in a source
abstract value.

The most common case of this is function calls. For every function
call in the program, a propagation strategy object is created that
knows the arguments that were passed to the function, and has an
abstract value that represents the result type of the call. The type
of the callee is set to propagate to this object. When it receives a
function type, it will set the argument types of the call to propagate
to the argument variables of the function type, and set the return
type of the function type to propagate to the call's result type.

This means that function types must hold references to the abstract
values for their argument variables, and for an abstract value that
represents their return type. (And, in fact, another one that
represents their `this` type, though we'll ignore that in the next
example.)

```javascript
function foo(x, y) { return (x + y); }
function bar(a, b) { return foo(b, a); }
var quux = bar("goodbye", "hello");
```

<img src="res/tern_graph.png" alt="A more complicated type graph" style="margin: 1em 0">

You can see the function types, as orange boxes, containing
(references to) abstract values. Function declarations will cause such
types to be created, and added to the variable that names the
function. The purple boxes are propagation strategies. There are two
calls in the program, corresponding to the two purple call boxes. At
the top is a simple box that handles the `+` operator. If a string is
propagated to it, it'll output a string type, and if two number types
are received, it'll output a number type.

The arrows going into the arguments and coming out of the result type
of the call propagators are added as soon as the call is seen. The
arrows coming out of the arguments and going into the results are
added when an actual function type is found for the callee.

You can follow the string types that are passed to `bar` through this
graph, being joined together by the `+` operator into a single string,
and then flowing back down through the return types and into the
`quux` variable.

In this program, every value was used in a single way, causing almost
all the elements to neatly have a single ingoing and a single outgoing
edge. This is not typical for real code. Every assignment to a
variable will add another incoming edge, and every time it is read,
another outgoing edge is added. In a big program, variables that are
referred to a lot will have hundreds of outgoing edges. It very
quickly becomes impossible to visualize the type graphs for real
programs in two dimensions. (I already had to go through three
throw-away sketches before I found a layout for the above graph that
was not a tangled mess of crossing arrows.)

Tern defines a number of other propagation strategies, handling things
like property reads and writes, and creating instances from
constructors. These work in ways analogous to the call strategy
described above.

An important feature of these type graphs is that no matter in which
order they are built, the final result will be the same. If you call a
function that is only defined later in the program (or in a file that
is defined later on), your call node will sit there patiently waiting
until a type is propagated to it. And when that finally happens, it'll
set up the necessary edges in exactly the same way that it would have
done if the function had been seen before the call.

## Source-less sub-graphs

One important property of this inference algorithm is that it will
only give types to things when the types are actually observed being
assigned or passed to it. This is fine, most of the time, but can be a
problem for functions that are never calledâ€”no types will flow into
the function's arguments.

Why would you write a function and never call it? Usually because you
are writing a library.

Tern doesn't fundamentally solve this problem, but it uses a trick to
be able to show at least something, even for abstract values that
don't have any definite value. By looking at the propagations made
from an abstract value, it is often possible to get some clue on the
way it is used. If, for example, it is propagated to a variable that
usually holds numbers, it might just be a number. If its `charCodeAt`
property was accessed and the only type we know of with a `charCodeAt`
property is the built-in string type, it's probably supposed to be a
string.

Guessed types are not added to the actual type graph. They are only
returned when directly asking for the type of an abstract value that
has no known type. This means that if you have a function like this...

```javascript
function gurble(frobs) {
  return frobs.reduceRight(function() { /* ... */ }, 0);
}
```

... Tern will consider the `frobs` argument to be an array when
displaying argument hints, but *won't* actually propagate anything to
the return type, because it isn't sure (and once a type is propagated
into the graph, there's no way to un-propagate it).

## Run-time type construction

Here's a pattern that's relatively common in JavaScript code:

```javascript
function extend(proto, props) {
  function Ctor() {}
  Ctor.prototype = proto;
  var obj = new Ctor();
  if (props) for (var prop in props) obj[prop] = props[prop];
  return obj;
}
```

This creates a new object that extends another object with some new
properties.

The type of the resulting object is not 'visible' in the source code.
It is dynamically created at run-time. Yet, if a piece of code uses
this pattern to set up its types, Tern will completely fail to
understand it unless it can properly interpret what the code is doing.

And now we're off into dodgy hack land. In order to meet this
challenge, Tern uses a special treatment for `for`/`in` loops that
appear to be copying properties. When it encounters them, it assumes
that the properties from the source object will be copied to the
target object. It ignores control flow (conditionals and such) and
simply copies *all* properties.

That solves half the problem. Now if you call `extend` once, it will
create a new object type at the `new` expression, copy in the
properties from `props`, and return it, resulting in more or less the
type you'd expect.

*But*, if you create multiple types using `extend`, you'll run into
another problem. All of them will have the return type of `extend`
flow into them, and the return type of `extend` will be all of them (a
function has a single abstract value representing its return type).
Thus, you'll end up with a useless mess that will have little to do
with your intended object types.

To fix that, Tern uses a heuristic to determine whether a function is
a type manipulating function, and if it decides that it is, its return
type will be computed in a different way. Instead of building a type
graph for the function's content once, and connecting that to all
argument and return types, the function is 'reinterpreted' for every
call site, creating propagations only for the current arguments and
return type.

(Conceptually, *all* functions that aren't recursive could be
interpreted this way. It would probably produce superior results, but
also be much, much more expensive.)

The heuristic to determine whether a function manipulates types or not
is rather superficial, and will only catch the pattern in the example
above and a few similar things. Every time a function assigns to a
`prototype` property, instantiates a locally defined constructor, or
copies properties in a `for`/`in` loop, a score is incremented. When
this score, divided by the size of the function, crosses some
arbitrary threshold, the function is marked as a type manipulator.

## Generic functions

The previous section already mentions how Tern's model of representing
the return type of a function with a single abstract value can lead to
bad results. A similar issue is seen with functions like this:

```javascript
function randomElement(arr) {
  return arr[Math.floor(Math.random() * arr.length)];
}
```

If you first pass it an array of numbers, and then an array of
booleans, the number and boolean types will both be flowing into the
result of any call site of the function.

To gracefully deal with functions like this, Tern tries to determine,
after it analyzed a function, whether it is a generic function that
has a return type that directly depends on its input type. To do this,
it again makes use of the type graph, by performing a graph search
trying to find a path from one of the arguments to the return type. It
doesn't search very deep, since that'd quickly get expensive, but for
example the `randomElement` function above has a simple path from
`arr`, though a propagation object that propagates the element type of
the array, to the return type.

For calls to `randomElement`, instead of propagating from the
function's return type abstract value, we simply take the element type
of the type (or types) of the first argument, and use that. This'll
correctly type `randomElement([true])` as a boolean, and
`randomElement([1])` as a number.

## The server

The inference engine makes up most of complexity of the project. But
above it is another layer, the layer that most client code talks to,
which is not entirely trivial. In order to support an editor, we must
also be able to maintain an up-to-date view on a code base as it is
being edited.

This is where the server component comes in. It keeps track of a set
of files, analyzes them, and answers queries about the code. Here's an
example of a request to a Tern server (requests are [JSON][json]
documents):

[json]: http://json.org/

```javascript
{
  "query": {
    "type": "completions",
    "file": "myfile.js",
    "end": 20
  },
  "files": [
    {
      "type": "full",
      "name": "myfile.js",
      "text": "var foo = document.f"
    }
  ]
}
```

It uploads a small file to the server, and asks for completions at
character position 20. The server might respond with:

```javascript
{
  "completions": ["firstChild", "forms"],
  "start": 19,
  "end": 20
}
```

Your editor could then use this information to provide actual
auto-completion.

The `query`/`files` format for request is intended to make it easy for
editor plugins to update the server's view of the code as they are
making requests. The server will save the files, so that if multiple
requests are made without the document changing, there's no need to
re-upload the code again and again.

There is also support for sending only a fragment of a file, providing
some context for the request but requiring this fragment to be
analyzed in the context of a previously built up type graph and scope
tree for the whole file. This is useful when dealing with big
filesâ€”analyzing 6000 lines of code can take up to 300 milliseconds,
which is too much for an interactive interface. If the 6000 lines were
analyzed in advance, in the background, and when auto-completion is
triggered, only the 100 or so lines around the cursor are sent to be
re-parsed and re-analyzed, the server can usually respond in under 30
milliseconds.

Another responsibility of the server is managing plugins that
influence the way files are loaded. There are currently plugins for
[RequireJS][reqjs] and [node.ns][node], which will automatically try
to load dependencies, so that modules loaded through `define` or
`require` will have their types understood by Tern.

[node]: http://nodejs.org/
[reqjs]: http://requirejs.org/

## Related work

In closing, I want to give a quick overview of related work. This list
is incomplete. There are tools (such as [VJET][vjet] for Eclipse) on
which I couldn't find any detailed technical information, and there
are likely others that I am not even aware of. You are encouraged to
write me if you have corrections or additions.

[vjet]: http://eclipse.org/vjet/

### Microsoft Visual Studio

Since VS 11, 'Intellisense' for JavaScript is nothing short of
[amazing][vs11]. It works, as far as I understand it, by actually
running your code in a magic invisible way, instrumenting the Chakra
engine to ignore I/O and cut off loops that run too long or recursion
that goes too deep, and then inspecting the resulting JavaScript
environment to find out what actual types were created for a given
variable or expression. This makes it amazingly accurate, even when
you're doing very odd things with your types. Downside is that it'll
sometimes not be able to run the code that you need a completion for
with its actual input types (it needs to find a code path leading to
that code, which can be tricky), and thus fail to provide completions.

[vs11]: http://blogs.msdn.com/b/jasonz/archive/2012/05/10/my-favorite-features-improved-tooling-in-visual-studio-11-for-javascript-developers.aspx

If you're curious about this technique, there's a very watchable
[video][vsvid] of a presentation by Jonathan Carter on this subject.

[vsvid]: http://channel9.msdn.com/Events/TechEd/NorthAmerica/2012/DEV308

### Scripted's Esprima-based content assist

The [Scriped][scripted] editor is a relatively new code editor with a
focus on editing JavaScript. It comes bundled with a
[plugin][espplugin] that parses your code and runs a type inference
algorithm on it in order to provide completions. This is similar to
the approach taken by Tern, except that its inference algorithm is
very different. From a quick reading of the code, it appears to be
mostly bottom-up, with a second pass that does some propagation. See
also this [blog post][scriptedblog].

[scripted]: https://github.com/scripted-editor/scripted
[espplugin]: https://github.com/scripted-editor/scripted/tree/master/client/scripts/plugins/esprima
[scriptedblog]: http://contraptionsforprogramming.blogspot.de/2012/11/jsdoc-is-more-than-just-documentation.html

### jsctags and doctorjs

[`jsctags`][jsctags] is a tool that generates [Ctags][ctags] files
from JavaScript code. [`doctorjs`][drjs] is a fork of `jsctags` which
uses a more advanced form of abstract interpretation in its inference
algorithm.

[jsctags]: https://github.com/evilpie/jsctags
[ctags]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ctags
[drjs]: https://github.com/mozilla/doctorjs

Both projects have been more or less abandoned, and don't yield very
good results. They did influence (mostly through Patrick Walton's
[`doctorjsmm`][drjsmm] experiment) the design of Tern a lot. But I've
always felt that the static, non-interactive way Ctags (or Etags)
work, which undoubtedly made sense back when they were invented, is
awkward and not really appropriate anymore. Tern uses a 'live' data
sourceâ€”a process that updates it analysis as you change the
codeâ€”instead.

[drjsmm]: https://github.com/pcwalton/doctorjsmm

### SpiderMonkey's type inference

The inference algorithm that `doctorjsmm` tries to implement is based
on the type inference subsystem of the [SpiderMonkey][sp] JavaScript
engine. Tern's algorithm is also closely based on this technique
(outlined in [this paper][tipaper]).

[sp]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SpiderMonkey
[tipaper]: http://rfrn.org/~shu/drafts/ti.pdf

However, a JavaScript compiler and an editing assistance plugin have
quite different goals, and thus also quite different requirements for
their type inference algorithms. SpiderMonkey's compilation process
has to be lightning fast, and Tern can take (a little) more time if
that happens to improve results. SpiderMonkey has to be conservative,
since producing incorrect information to the compiler might result in
segmentation faults or exploitable bugs in the compiled code. Tern can
more freely use approximations, since getting an inaccurate
auto-completion doesn't usually cause disaster. And finally,
SpiderMonkey's type inference can use feedback from the actual running
code. Tern doesn't run the code, so it doesn't have that luxury.
