---
layout: post
title: Facets as Composable Extension Points
tags:
- architecture
- codemirror
---

An extensible system, at its base, is a system that allows people to
add additional functionality that was not anticipated by the core
system.

A _good_ extensible system also makes sure multiple extensions that
don't know anything about each other can be combined, and compose in
ways that don't cause problems.

The problem has several aspects.

 - **Composition**: Multiple extensions attaching to a given extension
   point must have their effects combined in a predictable way.

 - **Precedence**: In cases where combining effects is
   order-sensitive, it must be easy to reason about and control the
   order of the extensions.

 - **Grouping**: Many extensions will need to attach to a number of
   extension points, or even pull in other extensions that they depend
   on.

 - **Change**: The effect produced by extensions may depend on other
   aspects of the system state, or be explicitly reconfigured.

This post tries to explain [CodeMirror](https://codemirror.net/6/)'s
(a code editor library) approach to solving this problem.

## Facets and the Editor State

A _facet_, in this system, defines an extension point. It takes any
number of input values and produces an output value. Examples of
facets are...

 - Event handlers, where individual extension can define function that
   handle a given event.

 - Editor configuration, like the tab size and whether content is
   read-only.

 - The set of markers to style the content with (for example syntax
   highlighting).

 - The set of gutters to show next to the content.

When defining an editor state, you pass in a collection of facet input
values, which together define the behavior of the editor. In a given
state, each facet has zero or more inputs. Their output value somehow
combines these—it may simply be an array of input values, or some
other function of them.

Facets are defined as values and (optionally) exported so that
third-party code can provide inputs. The core system defines a number
of facets, but facets defined outside it work exactly the same as
those defined by the core.

## Precedence

Often input values need a well-defined order. For event handlers, this
determines which handlers get to go first, for example. For gutters,
it defines the order in which they are displayed, and so on.

The order in which the facet values are provided when configuring the
editor state provides a predictable ordering for the facet inputs, and
is used as a basis for precedences. So if you provide two handlers for
a given event, the one that you provide first will take precedence.

But sometimes the code that defines a facet value knows that it should
have a given precedence, and you don't want to be dependent on the
programmer using this extension to get the relative order right. For
cases like this, the system also supports explicit precedence tagging,
which assigns one of five (“highest” to “lowest”) precedence
categories to a given extension. The actual precedence of inputs is
determined first by category, then by order.

## Grouping

A given extension often needs to provide multiple facet values. For
example, a code folding system needs to define a state field to hold
information on what is currently folded, key bindings to control
folding, a gutter to display fold markers, and a CSS module to style
its UI elements.

To make this easy, extensions can be provided as arbitrarily deeply
nested arrays. A function exported from an extension module can return
an array of extensions, which can be included in a bigger
configuration by just putting the result of calling that function
alongside other extensions in the array used to define the editor
state.

The actual ordering of the extensions is created by recursively
flattening this array, resulting in a single array of input values,
each tagged with a facet. These are then reordered based on explicitly
assigned precedence categories and split by facet to provide the
actual inputs for a given facet.

## Deduplication

Because different extensions may depend on each other, and thus
include each other's extension trees in their own extension tree, it
becomes likely that people will end up with duplicated extensions in
their configuration. For example, both the line numbers extensions and
the fold gutter extension might use an extension that defines editor
gutter infrastructure.

Because it can be wasteful or even break things to actually include
such shared dependencies multiple times, CodeMirror's extension system
deduplicates extensions by identity—if the same extension value occurs
multiple times in a configuration, only the one in the
highest-precedence position is used.

As long as extensions that run the risk of accidentally being used
multiple times take care to statically define their extension objects,
and always return the same object, this makes sure such shared
dependencies don't cause problems. Things like extension
configuration, which might be different across uses of the extension,
can often be put in a separate facet, which combines the parameters
given by multiple users in some reasonable way, or raises an error if
they conflict.

## Reconfiguration

Some of the inputs to facets might change over the lifetime of an
editor. And just creating a fully new editor state with a new
configuration may lose information (say, the undo history) contained
in that state.

Thus, existing states can be reconfigured. The system supports two
kinds of reconfiguration: full reconfiguration, where the root of the
extension tree is replaced with a completely new set of extensions, or
compartment reconfiguration, where you tag part of your initial
extension tree as a compartment, and then later replace only that part
of the tree.

In either case, the data-driven approach to configuration (the code
can compare the old and the new inputs) allows the system to preserve
parts of the state that didn't change, and update the values of facets
whose inputs did change.

## Dynamic Inputs

Systems with a complicated user interface tend to, at some point, grow
some form of incremental computation support. They need to keep the
things they show to the user consistent with their state, but their
state is large and complicated, and can change in all kinds of ways.

A code editor is definitely a complicated user interface, and because
it must be as responsive as possible, has a strong need to avoid
needless recomputations. Facets help with this. For a start, they
avoid recomputing output values when the facet's inputs stay the same,
so code that depends on the facet can do a quick identity-equality
test on the facet's current output value to determine whether it
changed.

But it is also possible to define _dynamic_ inputs for facets, which
provide an input value (or a set of values) that is computed from
other facets or other aspects of the editor state. The state update
system makes sure that, if any of the dependencies change, the input
value is recomputed—and, if it is different than its old value, the
facet value is also recomputed, as are any dynamic values that
depended on _that_ facet, and so on.

## Representation

Because most facets, for a given configuration, have a static value,
their representation can be optimized in a way that avoids doing any
work on state updates. This is helpful, because the editor state tends
to be updated multiple times per second, and we don't want to do any
superfluous work during those updates.

When a given configuration is resolved, facets are categorized as
either static or dynamic, depending on whether they have dynamic
inputs. Each facet is assigned an address in either the static values
array (which is reused as-is on any state update that doesn't change
the configuration) or the dynamic values array. The latter is copied
on state updates, and the dependency graph between facets (and other
state fields) is used to determine which of the values need to be
recomputed and which can be kept as they are.

Facets with no inputs at all aren't even stored in the state. When
queried, the value that facet has with zero inputs can be looked up
from the facet.
